Notifications and Alerts
============================

SystemGuard provides a robust system for managing notifications and
alerts related to system metrics. Users can view, configure, and manage
alert rules, as well as monitor active alerts and the status of the
AlertManager. The following sections provide more detailed insights into
these features.

View Rules
----------

The **View Rules** section allows users to see the alert rules that are
currently configured in the system. These rules define the conditions
under which alerts are triggered. SystemGuard supports creating new
alert rules based on custom system metrics.

Features:
^^^^^^^^^

-  **List Existing Rules**: View all the pre-configured alert rules in
   the system.
-  **Create New Rules**: Add new custom alert rules to monitor specific
   metrics or system behavior.
-  **Edit/Delete Rules**: Modify or remove existing rules based on the
   system’s requirements.

To view or create rules: 

1. Navigate to the **Rules** section in the SystemGuard Settings.
2. Review the list of current alert rules. 
3. Select **Add Rule** to create a new rule. 
4. Define the conditions and thresholds for the alert trigger.

Example Use Case:
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

You can create a rule to trigger an alert if CPU usage exceeds 80% for
more than 5 minutes. Once this rule is activated, SystemGuard will
continuously monitor the system and notify you if the conditions are
met.

Active Alerts
-------------

The **Active Alerts** section provides a real-time overview of all the
alerts that are currently active in the system. These alerts are
triggered based on the conditions defined in the alert rules.

.. _features-1:

Features:
^^^^^^^^^

-  **View All Active Alerts**: Display a list of all alerts that have
   been triggered and are currently unresolved.
-  **Alert Details**: For each active alert, view detailed information
   including:

   -  **Alert Name**: The identifier for the alert.
   -  **Triggered Rule**: The rule that caused the alert to activate.
   -  **Severity Level**: The level of urgency (e.g., critical,
      warning).
   -  **Timestamp**: The time when the alert was triggered.

-  **Acknowledge/Resolve Alerts**: Users can acknowledge alerts to mark
   them as noticed or resolve them if the issue has been addressed.

To view active alerts: 

1. Navigate to the **Alerts** section in the SystemGuard settings.
2. Review the list of active alerts. 
3. Select an alert for more details or to acknowledge it.

.. _example-use-case-1:

Example Use Case:
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

If a memory usage alert is triggered due to excessive consumption, this
section will show the alert, along with when it was triggered and the
specific threshold that was breached.

AlertManager Status
-------------------

The **AlertManager Status** section provides details about the current
state of the **AlertManager** service, which is responsible for handling
the alerts generated by Prometheus. The status page helps users
understand whether the alerting system is functioning as expected.

.. _features-2:

Features:
^^^^^^^^^

-  **Service Health Check**: Check if the **AlertManager** service is
   running smoothly without any issues.
-  **Recent Alerts**: View a log of recently handled alerts.
-  **Service Restart**: If the **AlertManager** service is not running
   or has encountered issues, users can restart the service directly
   from this page.

To view the **AlertManager Status**: 

1. Go to the **AlertManager Status** section in the SystemGuard settings.
2. Review the status and any issues with the service. 
3. Take necessary action, such as restarting the service, if required.

.. _example-use-case-2:

Example Use Case:
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

If alerts are not being processed or sent out properly, you can visit
the **AlertManager Status** page to verify that the service is
operational and troubleshoot any issues.
